phylogenetic/README.md, before:

# nextstrain.org/zika

This is the [Nextstrain](https://nextstrain.org) build for Zika, visible at
[nextstrain.org/zika](https://nextstrain.org/zika).

## Software requirements

Follow the [standard installation instructions](https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/install.html)
for Nextstrain's suite of software tools.

## Usage

If you're unfamiliar with Nextstrain builds, you may want to follow our
[Running a Pathogen Workflow guide][] first and then come back here.

### With `nextstrain run`

If you haven't set up the zika pathogen, then set it up with:

    nextstrain setup zika

Otherwise, make sure you have the latest set up with:

    nextstrain update zika

Run the phylogenetic workflow with:

    nextstrain run zika phylogenetic <analysis-directory>

Your `<analysis-directory>` will contain the workflow's intermediate files
and the final output `auspice/zika.json`.

You can view the result with

    nextstrain view <analysis-directory>

### With `nextstrain build`

If you don't have a local copy of the zika repository, use Git to download it

    git clone https://github.com/nextstrain/zika.git

Otherwise, update your local copy of the workflow with:

    cd zika
    git pull --ff-only origin master

Run the phylogenetic workflow workflow with

    cd phylogenetic
    nextstrain build .

The `phylogenetic` directory will contain the workflow's intermediate files
and the final output `auspice/zika.json`.

Once you've run the build, you can view the results with:

    nextstrain view .

## Configuration

The default configuration is in [`defaults/config.yaml`](./defaults/config.yaml).
The workflow is contained in [Snakefile](Snakefile) with included [rules](rules).
Each rule specifies its file inputs and output and pulls its parameters from the config.
There is little redirection and each rule should be able to be reasoned with on its own.

### Default input data

The default build starts from the public Nextstrain data that have been preprocessed
and cleaned from NCBI GenBank and the USVI data from https://github.com/blab/zika-usvi.

```yaml
inputs:
  - name: ncbi
    metadata: "s3://nextstrain-data/files/workflows/zika/metadata.tsv.zst"
    sequences: "s3://nextstrain-data/files/workflows/zika/sequences.fasta.zst"
  - name: usvi
    metadata: "s3://nextstrain-data/files/workflows/zika/metadata_usvi.tsv.zst"
    sequences: "s3://nextstrain-data/files/workflows/zika/sequences_usvi.fasta.zst"
```

The NCBI Genbank data are preprocessed using the [ingest/](../ingest/)
workflow and are automatically updated when new data are available.
The USVI records were pulled from https://github.com/blab/zika-usvi/
with [additional processing steps to remove duplicates][]. These are static
unless we make changes to the expected metadata columns.

### Adding your own data

If you want to add your own data to the default input, specify your inputs with
the `additional_inputs` config parameter.

```yaml
additional_inputs:
  - name: private
    metadata: data/metadata.tsv
    sequences: data/sequences.fasta
```

If you want to run the builds _without_ the default data and only use your own
data, you can do so by specifying the `inputs` parameter.

```yaml
inputs:
  - name: private
    metadata: data/metadata.tsv
    sequences: data/sequences.fasta
```

### Using example data

Alternatively, you can run the build using the example data provided in this
repository by running:

    nextstrain build .  --configfile build-configs/ci/config.yaml

Note: this only works with `nextstrain build`. Within repo input files are _not_
supported by `nextstrain run`.

### Deploying build

To run the workflow and automatically deploy the build to nextstrain.org,
you will need to have AWS credentials to run the following:

```
nextstrain build \
    --env AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID \
    --env AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY \
    . \
        deploy_all \
        --configfile build-configs/nextstrain-automation/config.yaml
```

[Nextstrain]: https://nextstrain.org
[augur]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/projects/augur/en/stable/
[auspice]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/projects/auspice/en/stable/index.html
[Installing Nextstrain guide]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/install.html
[Running a Pathogen Workflow guide]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/tutorials/running-a-workflow.html
[additional processing steps to remove duplicates]: https://github.com/nextstrain/zika/blob/f8a6423a7f6b6f1b30b6496d8433b99eff0d54ff/phylogenetic/data/README.md

Commit message:

Update docs for inputs
Updates based on review
<https://github.com/nextstrain/zika/pull/103#discussion_r2596553594>

phylogenetic/README.md, after:

# nextstrain.org/zika

This is the [Nextstrain](https://nextstrain.org) build for Zika, visible at
[nextstrain.org/zika](https://nextstrain.org/zika).

## Software requirements

Follow the [standard installation instructions](https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/install.html)
for Nextstrain's suite of software tools.

## Usage

If you're unfamiliar with Nextstrain builds, you may want to follow our
[Running a Pathogen Workflow guide][] first and then come back here.

### With `nextstrain run`

If you haven't set up the zika pathogen, then set it up with:

    nextstrain setup zika

Otherwise, make sure you have the latest set up with:

    nextstrain update zika

Run the phylogenetic workflow with:

    nextstrain run zika phylogenetic <analysis-directory>

Your `<analysis-directory>` will contain the workflow's intermediate files
and the final output `auspice/zika.json`.

You can view the result with

    nextstrain view <analysis-directory>

### With `nextstrain build`

If you don't have a local copy of the zika repository, use Git to download it

    git clone https://github.com/nextstrain/zika.git

Otherwise, update your local copy of the workflow with:

    cd zika
    git pull --ff-only origin master

Run the phylogenetic workflow workflow with

    cd phylogenetic
    nextstrain build .

The `phylogenetic` directory will contain the workflow's intermediate files
and the final output `auspice/zika.json`.

Once you've run the build, you can view the results with:

    nextstrain view .

## Configuration

The default configuration is in [`defaults/config.yaml`](./defaults/config.yaml).
The workflow is contained in [Snakefile](Snakefile) with included [rules](rules).
Each rule specifies its file inputs and output and pulls its parameters from the config.
There is little redirection and each rule should be able to be reasoned with on its own.

### Default input data

The default build starts from the public Nextstrain data that have been preprocessed
and cleaned from NCBI GenBank and the USVI data from https://github.com/blab/zika-usvi.

```yaml
inputs:
  - name: ncbi
    metadata: "s3://nextstrain-data/files/workflows/zika/metadata.tsv.zst"
    sequences: "s3://nextstrain-data/files/workflows/zika/sequences.fasta.zst"
  - name: usvi
    metadata: "s3://nextstrain-data/files/workflows/zika/metadata_usvi.tsv.zst"
    sequences: "s3://nextstrain-data/files/workflows/zika/sequences_usvi.fasta.zst"
```

The NCBI Genbank data are preprocessed using the [ingest/](../ingest/)
workflow and are automatically updated when new data are available.
The USVI records were pulled from https://github.com/blab/zika-usvi/
with [additional processing steps to remove duplicates][]. These are not updated
unless we make changes to the expected metadata columns.

### Adding your own data

If you want to add your own data to the default input, specify your inputs with
the `additional_inputs` config parameter.

```yaml
additional_inputs:
  - name: private
    metadata: data/metadata.tsv
    sequences: data/sequences.fasta
```

If you want to run the builds _without_ the default data and only use your own
data, you can do so by specifying the `inputs` parameter.

```yaml
inputs:
  - name: private
    metadata: data/metadata.tsv
    sequences: data/sequences.fasta
```

#### Metadata format

Please see the Augur docs on [How do I prepare metadata?][] and inspect the
default Nextstrain metadata TSV for Zika specific columns.

If using the [default config](defaults/config.yaml), then the columns required
are `accession`, `date`, `country`, and `region`.  

### Using example data

Alternatively, you can run the build using the example data provided in this
repository by running:

    nextstrain build .  --configfile build-configs/ci/config.yaml

Note: this only works with `nextstrain build`. Within repo input files are _not_
supported by `nextstrain run`.

### Deploying build

To run the workflow and automatically deploy the build to nextstrain.org,
you will need to have AWS credentials to run the following:

```
nextstrain build \
    --env AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID \
    --env AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY \
    . \
        deploy_all \
        --configfile build-configs/nextstrain-automation/config.yaml
```

[Nextstrain]: https://nextstrain.org
[augur]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/projects/augur/en/stable/
[auspice]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/projects/auspice/en/stable/index.html
[Installing Nextstrain guide]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/install.html
[Running a Pathogen Workflow guide]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/tutorials/running-a-workflow.html
[additional processing steps to remove duplicates]: https://github.com/nextstrain/zika/blob/f8a6423a7f6b6f1b30b6496d8433b99eff0d54ff/phylogenetic/data/README.md
[How do I prepare metadata?]: https://docs.nextstrain.org/projects/augur/page/faq/metadata.html
